Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering 
 
Assignment #3 – Predicting Rock Ground Motions (GMPE/Attenuation Relationships) 
 
Your answers to these questions should be reported in a memorandum format (i.e. a short, typed report 
detailing your answers as clearly and concisely as possible). Use text to state assumptions and answer 
questions where appropriate. However, the information will most effectively be conveyed by citing tables 
and figures placed within the text. A plethora of useful information (journal articles for select attenuation 
relationships, the Virgina Tech GMPE report by Russell Green with associated Matlab scripts and Excel 
files, NGA West, East, and subduction spreadsheets, etc.) for this assignment may be found on 
blackboard: 
 
 
Background Information for Questions 1 and 2 
Southern California was strongly shaken by the Northridge earthquake (Mw = 6.7) on January 17, 
1994. The fault rupture was primarily dip-slip, along a previously unknown thrust fault. The surface 
projection of the approximate fault rupture plane, is shown in Figure 1. Additionally, this figure shows the 
locations of strong motion stations in the Los Angeles metropolitan area (listed in Table 1). Answer 
Questions 1 and 2 below.  
 
1. 
Predict the maximum horizontal ground acceleration (geometric mean of the horizontal 
components) at the strong motion stations listed in Table 1 and indicated in Figure 1 (all are rock 
sites). Use the Abrahamson and Silva (1997), Idriss (2008), and Boore et al. (1997) attenuation 
relationships. Only calculate the median ground motions (i.e., do not consider the standard error 
terms at this time). How well do the predictions compare with the ground motions recorded at 
these sites during the 1994 Northridge earthquake? Which predictions were good or bad and what 
might be the cause for the observed results? 
 
Recorded PGA for each station is provided in Table 1 along with the closest distance to the fault 
rupture plane distance. You will need to estimate the Joyner-Boore distance for use in the Boore, 
Joyner and Fumal 1997 relationship. 
 
Please express your results in a table which includes all strong motion stations and values for 
rupture distance, Joyner-Boore distance, recorded PGAs, and predicted PGA from each 
relationship. Also, include a plot of distance versus predicted/measured PGA for comparison 
along with other comparison plots, errors, etc which may be useful to explain the results.  
 
2. 
For the Pacoima Dam and Mt. Wilson stations, use the Abrahamson and Silva (1997), the 
Abrahamson and Silva (2008), and NGA_West 2 (set weights equal for all methods) attenuation 
relationships to predict the full acceleration response spectrum at these rock sites. Assume the 
following for Abrahamson and Silva (2008) and NGA_West 2: Vs30 = 760 m/s, W = 20 km, Ztor 
= 5 km, dip angle (δ) = 40 deg., Z1.0= 34 m and rake angle (λ) = 100 degrees (from Wald et al., 
BSSA Vol. 86). All other values can be obtained from the information provided in this 
assignment, the journal article, or use default values. The actual response spectra obtained from 
the recorded ground motions for these two sites are presented in Figure 2. How do the measured 
response spectra compare with those predicted from the three GMPE approaches? Comment on 
similarities and discrepancies. What are possible causes for any discrepancies? Please provide a 
summary table of input values. 
 
Note: I have prepared an Excel file titled “RS_PacD&MtWil.xls” that contains the response 
spectra obtained from the recorded ground motions at the Pacoima Dam and Mt. Wilson stations. 
It may be found in the folder noted above. You may use this information, for comparison 
purposes, to plot the measured and predicted RS at each site in the same figure. Use a semi-log 
plot format. 
 
 
Table 1 
Record 
Distance  
(km)* 
PGA1  
(g) 
PGA2  
(g) 
Pacoima Dam Downstream 
9.3 
0.434 
0.415 
Topanga 
23.6 
0.266 
0.364 
Lake Hughes #4 
32.3 
0.084 
0.057 
Lake Hughes #9 
28.4 
0.217 
0.165 
Mt. Wilson 
36.9 
0.234 
0.134 
Rolling Hills Estates 
46.6 
0.116 
0.106 
Rancho Palos Verdes 
55.2 
0.072 
0.054 
Burbank 
20.0 
0.163 
0.120 
*Closest distance to the fault rupture plane. 
 
 
 
Background Information for Question 3 
The next generation attenuation (NGA) relationships documented in the February 2008 edition of 
Earthquake Spectra (Vol. 24) are for shallow crustal earthquakes in active tectonic regions (i.e., tectonic 
environments similar to California). The NGA East attenuation relationships used in central and eastern 
North America (i.e., intraplate earthquakes or stable tectonic regions) are for stable tectonic regions. 
However, there is more uncertainty regarding ground motion predictions in these areas due to the shortage 
of recorded data from significant earthquakes in the central and eastern U.S. It is interesting to compare 
the ground motions predicted in the western U.S. versus ground motions predicted in the central U.S. 
Answer Question 3 below. 
 
3. 
For a Mw = 8.0 earthquake on the San Andreas fault (strike-slip), use the NGA_West 2 GMPEs to 
predict the acceleration response spectra for two rock sites: one located 10 km from the fault and 
one located 100 km from the fault. Assume default values for all unknowns.  For a Mw = 8.0 
earthquake in the New Madrid Seismic Zone, use the NGA_East Spreadsheet to predict the 
acceleration response spectra for two rock sites: one located 10 km from the fault and one located 
100 km from the fault. Compare and contrast the response spectra for the sites located 10 km 
away from the San Andreas and New Madrid faults, respectively (i.e., plot them together). 
Compare and contrast the response spectra for the sites located 100 km away from the San 
Andreas and New Madrid faults, respectively (i.e., plot them together).  
 
Note: The predictions you just made are for “rock” ground motions and do not reflect the 
amplification/deamplification of ground motions caused by the overlying soil, which can be 
significantly thick in the Mississippi Embayment of the New Madrid Seismic Zone. We will 
address soil considerations next. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
